NMS-14667: Official docs readiness for Cortex TSS plugin release (#5211)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/deployment/pages/time-series-storage/timeseries/cortex.adoc

The plugin uses the xref:deployment:time-series-storage/timeseries/ts-integration-layer.adoc[time series storage integration layer] to convert metrics to a Prometheus model and delegate writes and reads to https://cortexmetrics.io/[Cortex].
The plugin also makes it possible for users to visualize graphs from the Cortex instance in https://docs.opennms.com/helm/latest/index.html[OpenNMS Helm], through the OpenNMS performance data source or the https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/prometheus/[Prometheus Data Source].

.Cortex Time Series Plugin
image::time-series-storage/cortex-plugin.png[Cortex plugin architecture,500]

== Requirements

Make sure you have the following before you start to use the Cortex plugin:

* Horizon 30.0.0+ (Meridian availability with the 2023 release)
* Cortex version 1.10.0+

NOTE: We plan to keep the plugin compatible with https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/[Mimir], Grafana's fork of Cortex, as long as Mimir remains compatible with Cortex.
The minimum supported Mimir version is 2.0.0.

== Deployment

To use the Cortex Time Series Plugin, do the following:

. Start Cortex.
+
See https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/getting-started/.
+

> If your aim is to get up to speed quickly in a test environment, you can use Docker Compose to deploy a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex].

Reviewer: Let's change link text to "minimal, standalone Cortex cluster".

. Download the plugin's `.kar` file from GitHub (https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms-cortex-tss-plugin/releases).

> . Copy the file into the `opennms/deploy` directory of your running instance.

Reviewer: Please change `opennms/deploy` to `OPENNMS_HOME/deploy`, or whatever convention we use elsewhere to denote the directory that's `/opt/opennms/` on RPM systems or `/usr/share/opennms` on Debian-based ones.

> . Enable and configure the time series storage.

Reviewer: Please change to "Enable and configure time series storage plugins in {page-component-title}"

+
[source, console]
----
echo "org.opennms.timeseries.strategy=integration
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.node=${node:label}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.location=${node:location}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.geohash=${node:geohash}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.ifDescr=${interface:if-description}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.label=${resource:label}" >> ${OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/opennms.properties.d/cortex.properties
----

> . Configure the plugin.

Reviewer: Please change to "Configure the Cortex time series storage plugin in {page-component-title}"

+

> Note that you can omit this step if you use the default settings.

Reviewer: Please add a note here: "Substitute the correct host and port for your Cortex cluster in each place where `cortex-service-host:9009` appears below."

+
[source, console]
----
config:edit org.opennms.plugins.tss.cortex

> property-set writeUrl http://localhost:9009/api/prom/push

Reviewer: In each line of this source block, please change `localhost` to `cortex-service-host`, so that the URL base is `http://cortex-service-host:9009` throughout.

property-set readUrl http://localhost:9009/prometheus/api/v1
property-set maxConcurrentHttpConnections 100
property-set writeTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set readTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set metricCacheSize 1000
property-set externalTagsCacheSize 1000
property-set bulkheadMaxWaitDurationInMs 9223372036854775807

config:update
----

> . Configure the plugin to remain installed after reboot:

Reviewer: Please change "after reboot" to "after a restart of {page-component-title}".

[source,console]
----
echo 'opennms-plugins-cortex-tss wait-for-kar=opennms-cortex-plugin' > "$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/featuresBoot.d/cortex.boot"
----

> == Cortex tips

Reviewer: For consistency with my changes above, please also change `cortex-service-ip-addr` below to `cortex-service-host`.

= Cortex Time Series Plugin

> The Cortex Time Series Plugin enables {page-component-title} to persist time-series performance and latency data to Cortex.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Cortex Time Series plugin enables {page-component-title} to persist time series performance and latency data to Cortex.
```

The plugin uses the xref:deployment:time-series-storage/timeseries/ts-integration-layer.adoc[time series storage integration layer] to convert metrics to a Prometheus model and delegate writes and reads to https://cortexmetrics.io/[Cortex].

> The plugin also makes it possible for users to visualize graphs from the Cortex instance in https://docs.opennms.com/helm/latest/index.html[OpenNMS Helm], through the OpenNMS performance data source or the https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/prometheus/[Prometheus Data Source].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The plugin also lets users visualize graphs from the Cortex instance in https://docs.opennms.com/helm/latest/index.html[OpenNMS Helm] through the OpenNMS performance data source or the https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/prometheus/[Prometheus data source].
```

> .Cortex Time Series Plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Cortex Time Series plugin
```

image::time-series-storage/cortex-plugin.png[Cortex plugin architecture,500]

== Requirements

Make sure you have the following before you start to use the Cortex plugin:

* Horizon 30.0.0+ (Meridian availability with the 2023 release)
* Cortex version 1.10.0+

NOTE: We plan to keep the plugin compatible with https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/[Mimir], Grafana's fork of Cortex, as long as Mimir remains compatible with Cortex.
The minimum supported Mimir version is 2.0.0.

== Deployment

> To use the Cortex Time Series Plugin, do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the Cortex Time Series plugin, do the following:
```

. Start Cortex.
+
See https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/getting-started/.
+
If your aim is to get up to speed quickly in a test environment, you can use Docker Compose to deploy a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone Cortex cluster].

. Download the plugin's `.kar` file from GitHub (https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms-cortex-tss-plugin/releases).

> . Copy the file into the `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/deploy` directory of your running instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Copy the file into `$\{OPENNMS_HOME}/deploy`.
```

> . Enable and configure time series storage plugins in {page-component-title}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Enable and configure time series storage plugins in {page-component-title}:
```

+
[source, console]
----
echo "org.opennms.timeseries.strategy=integration
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.node=${node:label}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.location=${node:location}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.geohash=${node:geohash}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.ifDescr=${interface:if-description}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.label=${resource:label}" >> ${OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/opennms.properties.d/cortex.properties
----

> . Configure the Cortex time series storage plugin in {page-component-title}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure the Cortex Time Series storage plugin in {page-component-title}.
```

+
Note that you can omit this step if you use the default settings.
Substitute the correct host and port for your Cortex cluster in each place where cortex-service-host:9009 appears below.
+
[source, console]
----
config:edit org.opennms.plugins.tss.cortex

property-set writeUrl http://cortex-service-host:9009/api/prom/push
property-set readUrl http://cortex-service-host:9009/prometheus/api/v1
property-set maxConcurrentHttpConnections 100
property-set writeTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set readTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set metricCacheSize 1000
property-set externalTagsCacheSize 1000
property-set bulkheadMaxWaitDurationInMs 9223372036854775807

config:update
----

> . Configure the plugin to remain installed after a restart of {page-component-title}:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

. Configure the plugin to remain installed after a restart of {page-component-title}:
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
```

== Deployment

To use the Cortex Time Series Plugin, do the following:

. Start Cortex.
+
See https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/getting-started/.
+
If your aim is to get up to speed quickly in a test environment, you can use Docker Compose to deploy a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex].

. Download the plugin's `.kar` file from GitHub (https://github.com/OpenNMS/opennms-cortex-tss-plugin/releases).
. Copy the file into the `opennms/deploy` directory of your running instance.
. Enable and configure the time series storage.
+
[source, console]
----
echo "org.opennms.timeseries.strategy=integration
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.node=${node:label}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.location=${node:location}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.geohash=${node:geohash}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.ifDescr=${interface:if-description}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.label=${resource:label}" >> ${OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/opennms.properties.d/cortex.properties
----

. Install the plugin from the OpenNMS Karaf shell.
+
[source, console]
----

> feature:repo-add mvn:org.opennms.plugins.timeseries/cortex-karaf-features/1.0.0-SNAPSHOT/xml

Reviewer 3: We can remove this step, if we assume that the users have installed the `.kar` file as noted above.

feature:install opennms-plugins-cortex-tss
----

> 

Reviewer 3: There's an additional step to take to make sure that the plugin remains installed/started after reboot. This would look like:
```
echo 'opennms-plugins-cortex-tss wait-for-kar=opennms-cortex-plugin' > "$OPENNMS_HOME/etc/featuresBoot.d/cortex.boot"
```
(Needs to be validated)

Author: @jeffgdotorg  or @j-white is there someone who can validate this? We need to merge this today.

= Cortex Time Series Plugin

> The Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex enables {page-component-title} to persist aggregated flow data to Cortex.

Reviewer: Please change "aggregated flow data" to "time-series performance and latency data".

Author: ```suggestion
The Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex enables {page-component-title} to persist time-series performance and latency data to Cortex.
```

The plugin uses the xref:deployment:time-series-storage/timeseries/ts-integration-layer.adoc[time series storage integration layer] to convert metrics to a Prometheus model and delegate writes and reads to https://cortexmetrics.io/[Cortex].
The plugin also makes it possible for users to visualize graphs from the Cortex instance in https://docs.opennms.com/helm/latest/index.html[OpenNMS Helm], through the OpenNMS performance data source or the https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/prometheus/[Prometheus Data Source].

.Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex architecture
image::time-series-storage/cortex-plugin.png[Cortex plugin architecture,500]

== Requirements

Make sure you have the following before you start to use the Cortex plugin:

* Horizon 30.0.0+ (Meridian availability with the 2023 release)
* Cortex version 1.10.0+

NOTE: We plan to keep the plugin compatible with https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/[Mimir], Grafana's fork of Cortex, as long as Mimir remains compatible with Cortex.
The minimum supported Mimir version is 2.0.0.

== Deployment

To use the Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex, do the following:

> . Start Cortex

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Start Cortex.
```

+
See https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/getting-started/.
+

> You can also download a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex] and start Cortex with `docker-compose up`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also download a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex] and start Cortex with the `docker-compose up` command.
```

> You can also download a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex] and start Cortex with the `docker-compose up` command.

Reviewer: Let's rewrite to:
If your aim is to get up to speed quickly in a test environment, you can use Docker Compose to deploy a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone Cortex instance].

> You can also download a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex] and start Cortex with the `docker-compose up` command.

Author: ```suggestion
If your aim is to get up to speed quickly in a test environment, you can use Docker Compose to deploy a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex].
```

> . Download the plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Download the plugin.
```

+
TBD

> . Enable and configure the time series storage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Enable and configure the time series storage.
```

+
[source, console]
----
echo "org.opennms.timeseries.strategy=integration
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.node=${node:label}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.location=${node:location}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.geohash=${node:geohash}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.ifDescr=${interface:if-description}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.label=${resource:label}" >> ${OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/opennms.properties.d/cortex.properties
----

> . Install the plugin from the OpenNMS Karaf shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Install the plugin from the OpenNMS Karaf shell.
```

+
[source, console]
----
feature:repo-add mvn:org.opennms.plugins.timeseries/cortex-karaf-features/1.0.0-SNAPSHOT/xml
feature:install opennms-plugins-cortex-tss
----

> . Configure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure the plugin.
```

+

> Note that you can omit this step if you use the default values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you can omit this step if you use the default settings.
```

+
[source, console]
----
config:edit org.opennms.plugins.tss.cortex

property-set writeUrl http://localhost:9009/api/prom/push
property-set readUrl http://localhost:9009/prometheus/api/v1
property-set maxConcurrentHttpConnections 100
property-set writeTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set readTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set metricCacheSize 1000
property-set externalTagsCacheSize 1000
property-set bulkheadMaxWaitDurationInMs 9223372036854775807

config:update
----

== Cortex tips

=== View the ring

> http://localhost:9009/ring

Reviewer: Let's change to `http://cortex-service-ip-addr:9009/ring`

> http://localhost:9009/ring

Author: ```suggestion
http://cortex-service-ip-addr:9009/ring
```

=== View internal metrics

> http://localhost:9009/metrics

Reviewer 2: Should these sections be expanded to include more detail?

Author: Yes. We will add more information closer to the release. I'll update, though, to make that clear.

> http://localhost:9009/metrics

Reviewer: Let's change to `http://cortex-service-ip-addr:9009/metrics`

> http://localhost:9009/metrics

Author: ```suggestion
http://cortex-service-ip-addr:9009/metrics
```

= Cortex Time Series Plugin

> The Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex helps {page-component-title} to persist aggregated flow data to Cortex.

Reviewer: Let's change "helps" here to "enables".

The plugin uses the xref:deployment:time-series-storage/timeseries/ts-integration-layer.adoc[time series storage integration layer] to convert metrics to a Prometheus model and delegate writes and reads to https://cortexmetrics.io/[Cortex].

> The plugin also makes it possible for https://docs.opennms.com/helm/latest/index.html[OpenNMS Helm] to visualize flow graphs from the Cortex instance.

Reviewer: Let's be more specific about which part of Helm. It's the Helm Performance Data Source Plugin.

Reviewer 4: >visualize flow graphs from the Cortex instance.

>It's the Helm Performance Data Source

Is it?

Author: I'll update the Helm sentence to be less project based, and more user based. Users can visualize flow graphs from Cortex in Helm through the performance data source. Something like that.

Author: @jeffgdotorg is there additional configuration required in Helm to make things work with Cortex? If so, we need to document it.

.Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex architecture
image::time-series-storage/cortex.png[Cortex plugin architecture,500]

== Requirements

Make sure you have the following before you start to use the Cortex plugin:

* Horizon 30.0.0+ (Meridian availability with the 2023 release)
* Cortex version 1.10.0+

NOTE: We plan to keep the plugin compatible with https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/[Mimir], Grafana's fork of Cortex, as long as Mimir remains compatible with Cortex.
The minimum supported Mimir version is 2.0.0.

== Deployment

To use the Time Series Storage Plugin for Cortex, do the following:

.Start Cortex
See https://cortexmetrics.io/docs/getting-started/.

You can also download a https://github.com/opennms-forge/stack-play/tree/master/standalone-cortex-minimal[minimal, standalone version of Cortex] and start Cortex with `docker-compose up`.

> .Build and install the plugin into your local Maven repository

Reviewer: We should be able to eliminate this developer-centric step, replacing it with instructions for downloading the pre-built plugin from GitHub or another place. Details will become available closer to the September release day.

Author: Do we have a general idea of how this will work so that we can rough it in?

echo "org.opennms.timeseries.strategy=integration
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.node=${node:label}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.location=${node:location}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.geohash=${node:geohash}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.ifDescr=${interface:if-description}
org.opennms.timeseries.tin.metatags.tag.label=${resource:label}" >> ${OPENNMS_HOME}/etc/opennms.properties.d/cortex.properties
----

.Install the plugin from the OpenNMS Karaf shell

[source, console]
----
feature:repo-add mvn:org.opennms.plugins.timeseries/cortex-karaf-features/1.0.0-SNAPSHOT/xml
feature:install opennms-plugins-cortex-tss
----

.Configure
Note that you can omit this step if you use the default values.

[source, console]
----
config:edit org.opennms.plugins.tss.cortex

property-set writeUrl http://localhost:9009/api/prom/push
property-set readUrl http://localhost:9009/prometheus/api/v1
property-set maxConcurrentHttpConnections 100
property-set writeTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set readTimeoutInMs 1000
property-set metricCacheSize 1000
property-set externalTagsCacheSize 1000
property-set bulkheadMaxWaitDurationInMs 9223372036854775807

config:update
----

> .Update automatically

Reviewer: This step is specific to developer environments, and should also go away once we're building and releasing the plugin.
